The Joe Rogan.
Experience. When did San Francisco shift?
Cuz I I've been going to San Francisco to do stand up since the
1990s. And I don't know when I noticed it, there was always homeless people,
but they, they were not camping.
Like it wasn't as chaotic as like you're never gonna get away from a certain
amount of mental illness. Correct. Right.
You're never gonna get waved with a certain amount of drug addicts and there's,
you know, it's, it's a thing with cities. When did it get where it is and how,
what were the steps? Right.
So you really have to go back.
So culturally San Francisco has been very tolerant of drug use since the
19th century.
It had op DS dens that it was the last to shut down of anybody in the 19th
century. But then you really go then the,
of the sixties and a celebration of drug culture in the sixties,
people think of it being psychedelics and marijuana,
but it also included amphetamines and heroin. I mean,
you go back to Janus Joplin in the sixties, she was doing heroin. Do you know.
That that's also where the CIA did operation midnight climate?
I'm not surprised. Yeah. That's where they did there,
where they would have brothels and they would dose the Johns up with LSD and
observe them through two way.
Mirrors. I'm not surprised <laugh> yeah. It's it's so as a cult,
a very libertarian culture, right? Yeah.
So it makes sense that it's it's that way.
But then I think you have to go to the 1990s, uh,
with the har which movement that I was involved in and reduction also had at the
same time, it wasn't exactly the same movement,
but it was also expanded treatment of pain through
opioids. And that's the beginning of the opioid epidemic really begins with the
liberalization of opioids so that we just overprescribed opioids. Right.
It's now a famous story in the United States. We,
we just gave them a away to too many people. A lot of, um,
people that probably should have received an antidepressant or maybe some
medicine for ADHD or were just depressed,
were getting opioids and their doctors were encouraged to do it.
Obviously the pharmaceutical industry encouraged it Obama. Then we, we,
we started restricting that around 2010 and then a out of those people then
switch to heroin. And then, and then meanwhile,
in the background really growing from the sixties,
but just getting more and more intensified and concentrated is meth.
So you have two separate epidemics, meth and opioids, and they both kill.
Now we're into we're into next generation opioids of, from heroin,
which is fentanyl, which is something that you've covered here a lot. Um,
and so that's how you get these just rising. So you basically,
on the one hand you get gradually increasing death toll from that 17,000 in the
year 2000 to 93,000 last year. But fentanyl also is game changing.
And so it's much easier. Usually heroin, it's harder to overdose.
Usually it's because of mixing with alcohol or benzo death Aine,
but you get to fentanyl and it's much easier to just overdose directly on
fentanyl and now the Narcans not working as well against the fentanyl.
So that's basically it. Now the tents,
I tried to answer this question and there's disagreement about it,
but definitely occupy brought a lot of tents into the homeless community. Ah,
interesting. In 2011, I mean,
I remember around in Oakland where I was working at the time,
there were all these occupy tents at the down in front of the city center and
the same thing in San Francisco. Then after occupy ended, the activists,
the anarchist activists just gave the tents to the, and you know,
it's, it seems like a nice thing to do, right?
Like here you have a tent to stay in.
It seems like the compassionate thing to do,
but then it basically just grew outta control. And so we, we call, you know,
we euphemized it by calling it an encampment, you know,
it makes it sound like it's a happy camp. Yeah. But we know that, you know,
women are raped in those camps.
Mentally ill people are taking advantage of people, overdose and die.
People are killed when you can't make payment for your drugs. The,
the drug dealers stab you with a machete. So these are really violent,
dangerous, terrible places you get hepatitis because of all the feces.
So it just spiraled outta control. So it's hard to,
it's hard to pinpoint any single thing, but I think, yeah, for sure,
like occupy 10 and years ago, and then just a, you know,
I mean we even see basically cities and police becoming more liberal around
public drunkenness in like the seventies and the 1980s when
homelessness really emerged. Um, you mentioned comic relief. I mean,
comedians actually did a real disservice on this issue to Billy crystal Whoopi
Goldberg, Robin Williams,
by suggesting that homelessness was a problem of poverty.
It was really a result of the crack epidemic, uh, crack and alcohol.
Certainly there were economic forces involved, but,
but progressives have just badly misled people into thinking that this is a
problem of high rents.
Is this just because it feels good to like rally against the rich and to
say that we need you to be compassionate. And is that what it is?
Yeah. I think that if I had to summarize it, uh, I,
I quote this amazing addiction specialist from Stanford, Keith Humphreys,
who calls it left libertarianism.
So it's basically this idea and this is where the book ends up going.
Is that to victims, give everything and nothing, you know, that's,
it's a combination of a radical left view,
but also combined with the libertarianism. So that's, what's kind of behind it.
I mean,
you interview people and they just think it's imoral to demand anything from
addicts or from homeless people. How dare you. Right. You know,
how dare you ask them to change their behavior,
their victims of all these terrible said in a lot of cases they are.
But the whole thing is that nobody to, to,
to suggest that somebody's essentially a victim actually ends up being,
I think, racist, the idea that all black people are victims,
I think is a racist idea.
The idea that all white people are benefit from privilege, also a racist idea,
but that kind of racist, it's a different kind of racism than the,
the type that we're all used to, which was, you know,
racism type one was how do we justify enslaving Africans
basically? And how do we justify prejudicial policies against, you know,
people of color, mostly type two comes out of
guilt, you know? And so really it starts in the sixties. Um, you know,
at a point where at we passed civil right legislation in 1964,
you get to 1970 and this very famous book gets published called, um,
blaming the victim.
And the idea is that basically any policies that demand summit
accountability and taking a personal responsibility is effectively a kind of
victimization watch the.
Entire episode for free only on Spotify.